Zomma & vomma risk as a response to macro, Weekly post (19-23/May)

We have a lot of Fed speakers and PMI (thursday) and VIX expo this coming week. May OpEx was supportive, and for me this still seems topish. Even more.My reversion model shows 77.94% probability for a reversal towards 5518.31 (lvl that stil wouldn’t be trendchanging, but would confirm bullish trend and build the structure for a longer time frame; like monthly), closer to my target of 80%+.

I would still maintain day by day approach, and take longer dated short once the reversion model goes above 80%. Q3 looks very bearish to me. Before I delve into fundamental explaination, let me share you something very important:coded rolling SPX/VIX beta

As you can see, since May 5, the beta has spiked. The key is the sudden steep spike, not the current beta value itself. Remember, what SPX did on those days? - There were two days, were SPX corrected back a bit. Then it suddenly was saved by gov speakers, and squeezed up more. The beta is still negative, but went longer (jargon for ‘more positive’/’less negative’). So, on that SPX pullback VIX still went down, but when SPX started to rally, the VIX decline started to slow down in an accelerating manner. This happens when the whole smirk gets bid, including the tails too.

Now, this, considering the very cheap IV relative to RV, tells me that short vol trade is oversold. And not simply oversold, but aggresively. Market reached a point, where there start to be liquidity problems to the upside, and this is important bcs during this aggressive vol selling, the market accumulated significant zomma and vomma risk…

Well, first, you have to understand, that it is not a coincidence that IV is usually higher than RV. There’s two reason for that: 1) risk-neutral pricing embeds the equity risk premium, so options (priced under the assumption that the underlying grows at the risk-free rate) must reflect investors’ demand for compensation above that rate; and 2) structural supply-and-demand imbalances in the options market—stemming from persistent demand for downside protection, reluctance to sell low-premium strikes, and flows from structured products—create a variance risk premium that lifts IV above RV. Empirical studies across asset classes confirm this premium is not only significant but also pervasive. So, bcs short vol traders implicitly take on equity risk (IV rises when markets fall), they must be compensated for that risk over and above the risk-free rate, pushing IV above RV. However, when IV is significantly lower than RV, it indicates that the market is not adequately pricing in the possibility of extreme events. And this is the case now. Volatility is overshorter, while market accumulated heavy zomma and vomma risks.

Zomma is Taleb’s shadow gamma basically, it measures how gamma changes to changes in vol, or also can be interpreted as the vanna change to spot. Mathematically they are equal. Vanna peaks around ~20 delta contracts, and thats where zomma is zero (below 20 deltas it is positive), then it goes sharply negative (like an inverse bell curve), turning upwards above 50 deltas, and goes positive again on the right tails. When volatility declines, the zomma’s inverse bell curve becomes steeper and deeper between ~25 deltas. And if vol increases, the curve flattens.

This means, that if vol is overshorted, the zomma is heavily negative between the tails. The dealers who are long ATM gamma and OTM call (upside) gamma, and short OTM put (downside gamma), will have their speed exposure get more convexity, if volatility suddenly spikes: their long ATM gammas will be shorter, and their far OTM call gammas will be longer, creating more upside resistance, and less downside support. Also their short OTM put gammas will be even shorter. And this creates a fatter left-tail than what many would assume simply looking at naked gamma and charm exposures. (Rising vol doesn’t effect OTM charm exposures significantly but it increases charm effect a bit.)

Vomma risk is the other one. Vomma is “the gamma of vega” (also called volga = vol + gamma), meassuring the vega change relative to change in volatility. As traders are shorter vol on the front-end and longer vol on that back-end, while realized vol of vol is rallying up (alarming heavy gamma squeeze-risk for VIX), if vol spikes, the vomma of the shorter dated options will eat up the position’s vega making the spread between the legs to be narrowing fast, creating significant losses, even despite their net vega exposure was positive previously. And so they need to cover. And these two factors, taking spiking SPX/VIX beta into account, hints a hidden risk accumulated during this heavy vol selling.

And is there any reason for volatility to spike?Absolutely… underestimated stagflation, geo risks, etc.Big institutions, funds are ready to sell into strenghtSome people like to compare this rebound of short vol inducated vanna squeeze to the rebound of post-Covid crash. But what they forget is that there was no stagflation back then, and Fed did QE along with aggressive fiscal stimulus (creating stagflation for later), and there were less geo tension and less growth concern than now. For now the supply side issues are accumulated, and the weighing machine already turned on in April. I strongly think that this is already a bear market rally, but most people will see it in Q3. We have hidden QE, but also strong liquidity issues that won’t get solved by the Fed again, because inflation risk is simply too high. Fiscal stimulus is also missing, because Trump knows the risk well, they are just playing for the sentiment until the deals are done. You should take his tweets serious, because as I said back in April, he can’t say things unresponsibly, and he knows well what he is talking about, despite what many thinks. But this rally now has no other fundamentals than speculative short vol trade and sentiment manipulation. The supportive bullish structure, gap fills did not happen as they should have to. So be careful and patient.

Based on volatility, this is these are the primal ranges:

SPX = 5898.48 - 6018.27; 5869.51ES = 5885.67 - 6011.32; 5855.28NDX = 21149. 57 - 21706.29; 21014.94NQ = 21111.12 - 21689.37; 20971.28

SPX = 5898.48 - 6018.27; 5869.51ES = 5885.67 - 6011.32; 5855.28NDX = 21149. 57 - 21706.29; 21014.94NQ = 21111.12 - 21689.37; 20971.28

Here I coded and animated you how the positioning has changed into May 23, from Wednesday to this day:

I want you to look at the 5850/5800 strikes. We saw that pre-OpEx then et bet was a short put spread, but post-OpEx it became a long ratio spread by doubling the customer long leg at 5800. This means that the net bet is a sharp increase in volatility while customers don’t bet on more fall, and sold a lot of puts below 5800 in addition, after opex creating a local steep short speed environment, to grab a potential falling momentum and swallow the potential increasing volatility. Note, the increased short gamma bar at 5875; this implies that the net effect of the 5850 big long gamma bar is neutralized on a net basis, but it can have local effect, if vol would decrease in case momentum leads there. All in all, this positioning shift foreshadows a bet on price decline and higher vol.

Here you can see the monthly expo: from 5d Put to 5d Call:

On a fixed strike basis, market does not show fear. But skew became steeper. They expect healthy pullback, not uncontrolled blackswan. I will update this post later on, if necessary.

PERSONAL ANNOUNCEMENT:On the coming weekend and Monday (May 24-26) I won’t post, I won’t be at the desk.
