Intraday post (03/April), Tariffs, Fed

Before you continue, make sure you are understand what I keep telling about geos and tariffs (all covered and linked in this post), to not believe what the media and furus are telling about this economic situation. Yesterday I also showed you that everybody can see the stagflation already (that I keep writing about in the past 3 years).Trump dropped the tariffs (including the surprise that I promised, targeting the BRICS)

This is just the beginning. (But don’t forget that Trump is very much following Deepak Malhotra and Max Bazerman’s work the “Negotiation Genius”.

Now, before jumping in to the positioning, let’s see, what the skew shows us. Friday expo:

April OpEx:

Quarterly:

One word comes into my mind: complacency. The tails don’t even bother. What we see is a “long put spread” pattern, a long downside vol strategy, but no tail hedge. Tails almost always react for everything… but now, on the cliff of a new, uncertain worldorder, tariff war, and obvious stagflation, they don’t move. My guess is that market is complacent about a supportive, dovish FOMC. But this decline is not enough for a significant negative wealth effect. And remember my geo post: the plan is to get a sustainable QE and growth, and Trump wants to kill stagflation. If QE would come now, we’d get a new cycle just like it was 4-5 years ago.

But FOMC is very much likely to wait, exactly because the inflation risk is still too high. “Trump put” will come later. So I assume a very high chance that the market is too complancent about the left-tail. And the left-tail has never been the tariffs itself, but its consequences:

Read my weekend post…

INTRADAY POSTCoding intraday positioning

Speed profile breakdown:

As always said: this is a mechanical implication, and any deviation from this reveals the hands of the customer flow.The 5500/5510 is a potential pin, if vol can decrease there. And this is where downside gamma starts to come into effect and stabilize the downward move. This is the most important pivot for the overall profile. To the upside, if a gamma squeeze happens, 5575/77 is a potential resistance if vol can decrease. And coding zero vanna at 5680.96 (vanna convexity is positive, so low vol needed to break through this). Charm flip is also in this zone. It is flat-to-positive below, and negative above. So the charm convexity (color) is flat-to-negative, meaning ,we should expect light gamma decay, providing more room for the volatility.

OptionsDepth Heatmap:

(Description is here)

Yesterday’s high vol decline during AH triggered automated trading halts, that are designed to pause trading temporarily to help stabilize the market during extreme volatility. Risk parity based funds will also sell, but I would like you to remember that insider’s interest is a steady decline, not a vol squeeze. Simply, because the former one can be controlled on a higher rate. Because what is the goal? - Check the posts I linked… This is why this announcement was scheduled to AH, and this is why Trump needs these billionars around him (once the job is done they will moved away from the gov friendly). So the interest is to find liquidity now.

SCRIPT INPUTSAfter a 210+ pts overnight gap, the projected mean reversion thresholds are inaccurate
