Short geo overview again, Intraday post (08/April)

As I mentioned in the Friday premarket post and in the post-market thread, my call is to see some vol selling consolidation this week, and a potential stabilization into April OpEx, as it looks now. The reason is that the market sees a slight chance that Trump can deal with stagflation by Easter (as it was originally planned), also coincidencing with ECB press conference.

The US - Russia negotiations are slowly moving forward, the relationship is improving. We have FOMC Minutes, CPI, and PPI ahead, tariffs, Iran, EU/China response, the ECB meeting, etc. While my personal main position is long delta and theta and short vol, I still build lifeboats, because the market is still “in the woods,” as I keep repeating, and it will remain so until the US - Russia deal is done. Because, as I said, the tariffs are only secondarily economic; they are primarily geopolitical, with which Trump intends to force the globalist elite to the negotiating table. Schwab’s resignation is a promising event. However, the market and the economy remain deeply entrenched in stagflation. These things do not happen overnight. Be patient.

The yield curve is undergoing significant bull-steepening, as investors expect central banks to ease monetary policy. Meanwhile, as short-term yields decline and volatility spikes, the cost of carrying positions (the borrowed funds used for investments) increases, making it less attractive to maintain risky carry trades, which leads to carry trade unwinding.

It appears the market is hedging for a potential retest of the lows heading into the data release and FOMC Minutes, but it’s less about direction and more about betting on volatility, especially going into Friday.

Market is seems to be likely about to go complacent with dovish Fed and betting on liquidity coming back to the market soon… not a coincidence…

Read:Geopolitical context,Tariff war, World re-polarization, from off-shore to friend-shore,Emerging deflationary concerns on the horizont,Central banks, recent weekly post,Listen to Treasury Secretary Scott Bessent.Advice: If you don’t want to get confused and truly want to follow along, always read what I link in the posts. I don’t dig them up for you by accident.

Personally, I don't believe that the Fed will be too dovish this month. Although that was my initial bias, I think that both the inflation trend and its volatility need to stabilize in order for us to see sustained dovishness and QE. But of course, as I always emphasize, this is an environment where it's difficult to predict things precisely, since everything depends on the decisions of the leaders. Insider rumors are about a bounce, but personally I feel it's overdue… it would ruin a lot of achievments of this decline. No significant deflationary fears yet.Based on that, I’m building my strategy and will hedge the Wednesday-Friday window. For now, adaptation and patience are the name of the game.

INTRADAY POSITIONINGCoding gamma for today session:

Contrary to how it might appear at first glance, the aggregated speed profile is positive, with a net slope of 4.03% from 4969.71 up to 5354.85Locally, the speed profile has a slope of 21.23% from 4969.71 to 5174.59, and a negative slope of -13.92% from 5174.59 to 5354.85.I code the centroid of the entire profile at 5199.70.Below this level, we should theoretically see steepening long vanna and short charm dynamics, but flattening long speed dynamics up towards 5219.39, and from that point on, short speed with upside shorter gamma allowing room for volatility and a potential gamma squeeze.

The downside pivot is 5147.33; if vol realizes upwards below this level, then the puts will start to print, heading back down towards 5040/5000, where the local negative speed might stabilize momentum.In theory, that’s how it should play out.Color (charm convexity) is negative, so we should expect elevated sticky vol.Any deviation from these assumptions reveals the actual hands of the underlying customer flow.

VIX key lvl is 42.5 to the upside. If it breaks, 52.5 is coming.And 37.14 to the downside, with target of 30s

SCRIPT INPUTS:(After a 100+ pts gap up, the mean reversion script inputs are inaccurate and misleading)
