Weekly post (17-21/march)

In this post I explained the geo context, that is crucial important bcs in these times where the world order is about to shift, the geopolitics, economy and market are breathing together.Here I explained the spot decay again and touched this OpEx - EOM window dynamics with JPM collar vs OpEx.I want to add, that on multiple occasions, the 1987 Washington Agreement between the Soviet Union and the USA has been mentioned—a deal in which both sides pledged to dismantle their ground-launched intermediate and shorter-range missiles. In 2019, Donald Trump was the first to withdraw from this agreement, followed by Vladimir Putin the very next day. Yet both parties continue to indicate willingness to abide by its terms on the condition that they can conduct official inspections at each other’s missile bases at any time. Of course, no such inspections have taken place officially since then.

On July 8, 1997 when NATO invited Hungary, Poland, and the Czech Republic to join, Russia and NATO signed the Founding Act, in which Russia accepted NATO’s future eastern expansions. In return, NATO promised not to deploy nuclear weapons within these new member states and, barring national security needs, not to station any further military forces in those countries. NATO fully adhered to this agreement until 2014, and even at the outbreak of the Crimean conflicts, it only stationed a symbolic number of troops along its border.Furthermore, last December, Russia presented the USA and NATO with a near-ultimatum in the form of a draft treaty. They demanded: 1) the former Soviet states that are not yet NATO members must never be allowed to join NATO; 2) NATO must not deploy strike capabilities, either near the Russian border or within Ukraine, and 3) NATO must roll back its infrastructure to its pre-1997 status.NATO rejected points 1 and 3, but was willing to negotiate on point 2—however, those negotiations have yet to take place.

The issue, therefore, runs far deeper than what the media suggests. Neither side is beyond reproach, but it was NATO that began to violate agreements with an aggressive approach towards Russian borders, while Russia—whose identity inherently involves feeling perpetually threatened—took preemptive steps against NATO.

This is the problem that needs solution. As I always say, a peace reached too quickly is no real peace, and a partial ceasefire is no real ceasefire. Progress is slow, but it’s happening. Fortunately, there’s no rush among the guys in Jeddah, and as far as I hear, negotiations are heading in a good direction—just inch by inch.

Meanwhile, certain circles on the Street are saying we’ll see positive signals from the Fed this week. We’re already seeing some of that reflected in prices. But remember that most insider activity goes under the radar. When there is competition like this, insiders often buy in small increments, so their moves don’t catch the attention of their rivals.If I look at close-to-close log returns, I see that since Monday, returns have been rising. Thursday’s down-tick did went lower along the spot axis, but its amplitude was noticeably smaller than in previous downward moves, and by Friday it broke back above zero. Negative returns have therefore declined since Monday.If I take the weekly average logreturns, I notice that since November 6 last year, we haven’t seen positive returns deviating so significantly from the weekly average as it was on Friday.

But there’s one huge difference—and it’s very important:Spot/vol beta has been trending downward! And this is particularly significant, despite the local negative gamma environment, and net bearish sentiment along the soc media.

This is a major hidden strength in the current momentum.

Why? Because of what I’ve been saying day in and day out: positioning is almost always favorable for a vol expansion, yet it’s not happening. Why not? As I mentioned—both I and my algo have noticed that most funds have switched to high-frequency mean reversion trading, which compresses return dispersion. Since volatility calculations include daily high–low ranges, this compression takes volatility down.On the other hand, the steeply rising net return with declining upside volatility (despite the theoretical local negative gamma effect) is quite paradoxical. Funds are net positioned in mean reversion trading in the ATH (while taking directional bets during asia and london sessions), but with a bit heavier weight on the long side day by day (coming from premarket). This is what we see. Meanwhile, bears keep shorting, so the slow, low-vol squeeze frees up even more liquidity in the market.

Algo reinforces this behavior. Hurst is negative, which is unusual. A negative value (if taken at face value) suggests an extremely strong anti‑persistence—in other words, very rapid reversals in short‑term fluctuations. (I used 15m datas, from Tuesday to Friday here.) Compared to previous elements, which were low but positive, e.g. around 0.1–0.3, this indicates that the short‑term mean‑reversion is being estimated as even stronger now. The HMM continues to classify the data as coming from a single, stable regime with almost negligible drift. Just a note—the negative drift's been steadily declining over the last few days and is nearly flat now. But remember, this is the Tuesday-Friday window. And the ADF is also signaling a pivot from trending phase toward mean reverting phase (it is slight, but it’s there).

I'm still seeing an edge in short vol trade (and intraday reversion trades on the call side, but only 1 or 2 trades at max), with a cautiously bullish short-term bias. If the VIX holds under 25 (ideally under 22) until Tuesday night, by Wednesday the dealers will be offloading a bunch of VX futures and buying ES futures. I’m not expecting a huge impact—more like some supportivness and vol crush. Stay cautious, because as I mentioned over the weekend, if the negotiations go south, the market could be pretty vulnerable to a vol squeeze.

Let’s look at the weekly skew:

What do we see on this chart?On one hand, we see that the demand for 22 delta puts has dropped significantly relative to 22 delta calls. There's no reaction to the FOMC at all—it's more about the OpEx, though not drastically so. The net weekly change for the 22d Put – 22d Call segment stays negative.We also observe that the ATM vol benchmark is steadily decreasing, and relative to this, the slope of the 22d Put vs. ATM segment is falling too. This means that demand for 22d puts is also declining significantly relative to the midpoint. Again, there's no noticeable reaction for Wednesday and only a very minor one for OpEx, which indicates that in the previous chart it was the call demand that dropped for Friday rather than an increase in put demand.Finally, the slope of the 5 delta put vs. 22 delta put segment is increasing. There's no reaction to the FOMC here either. But note—the balance scale still has two sides, and the demand for 22 delta puts is significantly falling. If the decline is faster than with the 5 delta puts, you end up with a curve like this. However, the fact that no convexity is visible on either Wednesday or Friday suggests that the market isn't afraid of these events.

I pulled a fixed delta vol table for this period, and we see everything's dropping:

Here you can see the 5d Put to 22 delta Call range as it was on Feb24, Mar10 and as it is today:

Besides the fact that there hasn't been any major fear in the market since last Monday, it's important to note that since Feb 24, the market's been showing a slight only a slight longer skew. The slope of the 22d Put vs. ATM vol went up from 1.105 to 1.181—a 6.70% increase, which is pretty small (relative to the claimed bearishness out-there).At the same time, you can see what I predicted last week: traders shifted from a shorter skew to a longer skew since Monday. As the spot slided higher, volatility dropped. When the spot went down, traders flipped to a shorter-skew stance, resulting in a spot down/vol down scenario (short put ratio trade). Then by Friday, it switched again, so volatility got compressed on both sides, which in turn provided liquidity.

Now, same 5d Put - 22 delta Call range into March OpEx:

Now,this is wild and not at all in sync with the bearish narratives. On February 24, the slope of the 22-delta put vs. ATM segment dropped from 1.125 to 1.099 (-2.28%). Meanwhile, the slope of the 22-delta put vs. 22-delta call segment hardly changed. On February 24, it was 1.22, and today it’s 1.21—a negligible -0.71% difference. This indicates that traders remain long skew, but now see the upcoming OpEx as less of a threat. It wasn’t very steep back then either, but the key point is that demand has shifted downward, rather than upward on the put side.If I'm right, and Tuesday was indeed the bottom and March OpEx proves supportive, then tail-hedge demand will strengthen this tendency. That could catch the market off-guard after OpEx (maybe not right away, but eventually).The market always tumbles when it's under-hedged.
