Pre-FOMC Short Note

In short: Stagflation

Dear Readers,As I mentioned, I’m on vacation during this week. My weekly post will arrive on Sunday. However, I promised that I’ll leave some infos on FOMC day, as it is the entry-event of a pivotal window.

As you know, my risk target in time is consistently the August post-FOMC times since May, I explained it a lot of times, why. I marked my blow-off top target at 6359 on July 3, and after I explained why we will see buyback flow post-OpEx, I updated the monthly expectations, and wrote this:

(SPX hit 6423.33 by Monday premarket, and that line still holds especially into today…)

Now, my momentum metrics say

that the market would need to produce 6412.01 at least in order to continue accumulating the postive imbalance. If it can’t (and only a fakeout happened, that was expected), the momentum will slowly start to give back its imbalances. The tendency is likely started, but we need confirmation…

The reversion model signals 89.48% probability for a reversion with target of 5997.98

that pretty much aligns with what the classical technical analysis tools can show us as well:

You can see the divergence from MACD since May gap-up, signaling “true” support in that range. The purple line indicator is a volatility adjusted momentum metric, also shows divergence, and 6291/6300 as first support (momentum confirmation zone), coincidencing with the 21-days VWMA.

FOMCTrump is playing his TACO-game, with luring short sellers in the game only to squeeze them out later, because there is no organice buying power left. People are arguing over what should the Fed do, but the truth is that both Fed and Trump are in a lose-lose situation. Stagflation.And because the reports hint that democrats own the game, we can expect a moderated Fed. If Powell doesn’t ease on “tariff inflation risk/uncertainity” narrative, the market will sell, and that will hurt Trump. As explained, they need lower rates to manage debt burden somehow. Market is in “good news are good news/bad news are bad news” mood, and while GDP data came out a bit better, sales still shows lurking slowdown! This is why market wants growth. It is at all-time-high, and overstretched and illiquid, the wealth effect doesn’t give enough room for the Fed to ease. Also, there is a strong expectation, that new tariffs raise import prices that will accelerate inflation into EoY (even reaching 4.3%).

BoJ is hawkish, creating a headwind for carry trades. Domestic demand is decelerating but still positive. If tariffs don’t have a larger-than-expected effect, the near-term recession is less likely. Now it is at ~40-50%.Microsoft, Meta, Amazon and Apple will report earnings today and tomorrow, the expectations are “solid revenue growth”. Credit spread is narrow, volatility is heavily sold, while the market is very concentrated on big names, and put/call ratio is at yearly lows = market is very-very complacent…

Positioning into Friday

The positioning is a long fly pattern around 6370/75, with net vol up/gamma up - vol down/gamma down, negative gamma decay, relatively low theta… and rangebound dynamics. The net skewness is flat-to-”right-tailish”.The centroid falls to 6342.73/6351.95 zone.Upside pivot is 6465.59, that’s where the spot could stabilize, but due to the long zomma it is more like a ‘cap’ on the momentum than a magnet, unless godd news happen. The downside pivot is 6249.39, that would confirm the downside move, but liquidity is there to hold the price and to manage downside vol.

As you know, I’m longer term bullish on the index, gold, silver, rates and bitcoin.
