A Guide to Reading My Daily Posts

Every time you look at tools such as put/call deltas, ratios, or even monitor changes in order flow (e.g., the ratio between selling and buying volume), you get lagging data.By contrast, my method is to reverse-engineer the structure the market is pricing in, decode the hidden patterns (short or long butterfly spreads or risk-reversal patterns), and derive both the key pivot ranges from expected flows and the implied distribution that the market is pricing in. As I’ve already written in my earlier educational posts about trading strategies, the pivot and the probability levels primarily function as checkpoints that provide information about the given price action and the underlying sentiment. I mark downside and upside targets, as well as local pinning and additional supportive/suppressive targets, separately.

First of all, I’m relinking my two earlier posts on my trading philosophy:

My basic trading principles Pt. 1 - Strategies, basic risk management

My trading principles Pt. 2 - The Wall Street Casino and My Story

My daily post contains three informations: 1) A premarket OptionsDepth Heatmap2) Script inputs (levels with assigned probabilities)3) Speed profile description4) Vanna flip, speed slip

Let’s review them in outline form…

1. OptionsDepth HeatmapWhat I always share is the one created from the EOD summary data. The reason for this is that looking at this positioning information reveals the structure that traders are pricing in for the next session. Intraday updates are nothing but lagging noise for me, providing only sentiment information. I don’t use them to plan the trading day, because to prepare for a new session all you need is the expected structure for the next day. I will dedicate a full post to analyzing the OptionsDepth heatmap. For now, remember that in every post I link a thread under the snapshot where I intuitively explain the dynamics of gamma, speed, color, charm, and vanna—just click on “Description is here”.

I don’t attach a charm exposure chart, simply because it is unnecessary most of the time. Charm has low impact, and only in the power hour. Color is far more important. Color is the slope of the charm curve, or in other words “gamma decay.” This tells us how gamma will change over time, directly impacting local and daily realized volatility.

2. Script Input LinesThese inputs should be copied into the “Inputs” field when using my indicator shared here.Then the script will plot the levels on the TradingView chart, assigning a probability to each line. These levels are derived from pre-market volatility positioning, assuming a Gaussian distribution. Basically, it tells you what probability the market assigns to the given ranges. In other words, the probability that the price will stay within the given band—i.e., reverse at that price level. With a simple 100 − x% calculation, you can compute the probability that the market will break through the given level.

At the risk levels, the probability is close to 50–50, which—based on backtests—confirms or disproves intraday momentum.This helps with position sizing, determining the magnitude of profit-taking, and shaping further strategies. Essentially, it provides a picture of the probability distribution implied by volatility. But let me emphasize again that volatility always assumes a symmetric Gaussian distribution, and I have deliberately not changed this. The calculation includes the day’s implied volatility and the expected realized volatility values, taking into account both the implied and realized vol of vol too.

3. Speed ProfileThis is the most important part of the daily letters.Speed is nothing more than the slope of the gamma curve. Differentiation, mathematically, means measuring the slope of a function’s curve; by definition, it is the tangent of the angle formed by the tangent line to the curve and the x-axis.

If you think of gamma as realized volatility, then the speed profile becomes the “realized-volatility smirk.”Gamma and vega are indentical and zomma tells us the relationship between them. Why identical? Because vega is the integral of expected gamma-scalping P&L over the life of the option:

In this way, vega manages implied volatility while gamma manages realized volatility.Intuitively, this is because: 1) if you sell vega to the dealers, they become longer vega. Consequently, they need to sell vega to hedge this exposure by selling options, reflexively pushing down implied volatility; however, 2) when you sell gamma to the dealers, they become longer gamma, meaning they will sell delta against spot up-moves and buy delta against spot down-moves, compressing local realized volatility. The larger the volume of the gamma trade, the greater the impact of dealer delta-hedging will be; thus, monitoring the tendency of intraday realized volatility gives us a much more informative and immediate insight into the underlying sentiment. However, it is important to know the ranges and price levels at which we need to watch these dynamics, and this is where the speed profile comes into play…

Vanna is the change in vega with respect to spot (the slope of vega plotted against spot levels), and hence it has a close relationship with the volatility smirk when measuring skew. Similarly with speed, which is the slope of gamma plotted against spot; we can use it to create a kind of “realized-volatility smirk” and measure its skew. This is my idea—keep that in mind!

What I do with it is basically measuring the fourth and fifth derivatives, taking into account time decay and the changes applied to volatility, which in this case produces a negative slope that I call a net hidden customer short butterfly spread.

Then, taking into account gamma decay and the net changes to expected volatilities, I calculate the net centroids of the three-dimensional speed surface and reduce it to two dimensions. I won’t go into the details in order to avoid plagiarism…

Centroid, upside and downside pivotsInitially, when I began developing this structured approach, my goal was to determine the net levels beyond which one can say that calls or puts begin to generate profit or start to decay on a net basis. That was the original idea behind the centroid. Later, however, I had the idea to look for the structure’s dynamic center of mass, while keeping the original meaning of the centroid I had in mind.

So when, in the premarket post, I write “centroid,” I mean the centroid of the entire realized-volatility skew. This is the area where aggregated dealer hedging flow is nearly balanced, and mechanical flows have a negligible—or no—effect on volatility.This means that within this area both realized volatility and price action are influenced solely by customer flow, so monitoring the trends in this range (such as intraday realized volatility, order flow, volume profile, etc.) gives direct and immediate information about sentiment. The interpretation of the trend is the function of the daily pattern (short or long fly, short or long risk reversal). See later.For this reason, the centroid is the most important daily pivot.

The upside and downside pivots are, from a mathematical standpoint, local centroids of the “22-delta” vs ATM skews. But both the ATM and the “22-delta” strikes are derived from the fourth and fifth derivatives, the values are netted.. These, again, are levels where changes in supply and demand arise locally, directly from customer flow. What must be examined near these levels is whether the realized trends correspond to the dynamics expected from the established hidden pattern. Another meaning of the centroids is that spot has shifted to the other side of the weighted-impact spectrum. So, for example, if a long-gamma and a short-gamma are next to each other some distance apart with negative speed (like a short risk reversal), then above the centroid the short-gamma effect will begin to prevail—with an expansion in realized volatility—while below it the long-gamma effect dominates, putting downward pressure on realized volatility.Any deviation is a sign that the market is repricing the previously priced-in structure, thus they serve as pivots.

Fly patternsA butterfly spread is a risk-reducing options strategy. I will now briefly present iron butterfly spreads specifically. It differs from the usual call or put flies in that a negative cash flow occurs up front, and any positive cash flow is uncertain and would occur later.

A long iron butterfly spread means going long the ATM call and put, then selling an OTM call and put against them. It is net long premium, thus long vega and short theta; long vanna and speed on the downside and short vanna and speed on the upside; short charm on the downside and long charm on the upside; and the net color exposure is positive. It is like being net long realized volatility (long color) in the middle while expecting realized volatility to decline toward the wings, expecting liquidity (stabilization) there instead of a reversion. The strategy profits from a move in either direction with heightened volatility in the shortest time possible, with a maximum profit equal to the difference between the high strike and the middle strike minus the net premium paid.A short iron butterfly spread is the opposite: short the ATM call and put and long the OTM call and put. This is when the speculator expects price to remain range-bound between the wings of the fly. The trade is net short premium, thus short vega and long theta; short vanna and speed on the downside and long vanna and speed on the upside; long charm on the downside and short charm on the upside; and the net color exposure is negative. It is like being short realized volatility in the middle while expecting realized volatility to increase at the wings due to the expected reversion toward the center.

A long iron butterfly spread means going long the ATM call and put, then selling an OTM call and put against them. It is net long premium, thus long vega and short theta; long vanna and speed on the downside and short vanna and speed on the upside; short charm on the downside and long charm on the upside; and the net color exposure is positive. It is like being net long realized volatility (long color) in the middle while expecting realized volatility to decline toward the wings, expecting liquidity (stabilization) there instead of a reversion. The strategy profits from a move in either direction with heightened volatility in the shortest time possible, with a maximum profit equal to the difference between the high strike and the middle strike minus the net premium paid.

A short iron butterfly spread is the opposite: short the ATM call and put and long the OTM call and put. This is when the speculator expects price to remain range-bound between the wings of the fly. The trade is net short premium, thus short vega and long theta; short vanna and speed on the downside and long vanna and speed on the upside; long charm on the downside and short charm on the upside; and the net color exposure is negative. It is like being short realized volatility in the middle while expecting realized volatility to increase at the wings due to the expected reversion toward the center.

But keep in mind that dealers take the other side of the trade. So when I say “dealer short fly pattern,” this means that customers bought that fly, and vice versa. Naturally, since hedging flow is essentially a double negative, it will ultimately reflexively realize the customer’s expectations.Example:

In the fly pattern shown in the figure, we should expect realized volatility to rise toward the upside and downside pivots, and to fall between towards the center.However, because the pattern is net long speed, we should expect lower highs to the upside and higher highs to the downside.With net color exposure positive, the fly’s center gamma is expected to increase, creating a growing “magnetic” effect as time passes between the pivots, while simultaneously steepening the speed profile and shifting the pivots toward the center gamma.This profile therefore primarily favors a range-bound regime and a slight, slow (net long theta) upward grind. This is because, according to the positioning, the downside target is more illiquid than the upside target. Therefore, the implied distribution can also be expected to be left-skewed.

If we observe any persistent deviation from these priced-in dynamics that the market had previously bet on, it signals that the structure—and thus the expectation—has changed.

Let me tell you an example…The pattern shows two spreads. However, to determine exactly what spreads they are, we also need to examine the dealer fly pattern’s delta exposure:

At the lower wing of the fly we see a slight positive net DEX caused by the ITM calls outweighing the low-delta sold OTM puts. In the center of the fly pattern we see net positive DEX due to the puts customers bought and the calls customers sold. And at the upper wing of the fly pattern we see deeply negative DEX, due to the ITM puts, but mostly due to the OTM calls that customers bought. Question: what kind of spreads do we have? Well, at the lower wing gamma is the most negative, so many contracts were bought there by customers, but the net delta is positive, meaning more dealer short puts than short calls. At the upper wing gamma is slightly negative, so dealers are net short contracts there with deeply negative net delta, meaning they are holding more short calls than long puts. Finally, at the center we have net long gamma, meaning dealers are net long contracts from customers, with net positive delta, holding more long calls than long puts. In this logical derivation, the relative steepness between the GEX and DEX columns is the most telling.This means customers hold a long ratio put spread to the downside with a 1:12 ratio, and a long ratio call spread to the upside with a 1:2 ratio.

This means they are betting on a heavy increase in realized volatility to the downside, which we should see playing out as we approach the pivot—and beyond the pivot, intraday RV making higher highs.When spot approaches and reaches the downside target, realized volatility should remain high, while put skew should be sold in order to see a rebound. The reason is the implication of relatively high volatility with declining intraday realized vol of vol, which indicates illiquidity at these levels. If realized volatility starts to go lower with heightened vol of vol, that would be a sign of sudden liquidity there, signaling that traders are selling strangles and straddles down there, expecting stabilization.Also, because spot is stabilizing below the centroid, customers would start to close their upside long call ratio spread, which is net negative delta for dealers, making them longer delta—meaning they have to sell delta as they unwind their hedges.However, the key is that SPX/RV beta should remain negative during long speed. If beta starts to shift longer, that would be a bullish sign only if call skew starts to catch a bid on a fixed-strike basis. But again, that would be against the structure, because the market got overly bullish on something and a gamma squeeze is incoming.To the upside, customers are also net long upside realized volatility, but at a calmer pace. Above the upside pivot we should expect an increase in realized volatility, but much lower than to the downside—making lower highs. But to see reversion back toward the center of the fly pattern, we must see this RV move up while call skew moves down; otherwise it will start to stabilize up there if intraday realized vol of vol is elevated during the intraday RV dump.Also, because spot is stabilizing above the centroid, where dealers are net long delta, customers will start to close their downside long ratio put spreads, which generates a delta buyback flow. This usually happens near the power hour.As the net speed profile is positive, this means that customers are betting on more liquidity to the upside than to the downside on a net basis. As a result, once spot builds a structure above the centroid, we can expect more upside momentum rather than downside. If the net profile were negative speed, by contrast, upside momentum would be less sustainable, with a much greater chance of reversing back toward the center of the fly, while the more stable move would favor the downside.This is like the skewness of a distribution.

This means they are betting on a heavy increase in realized volatility to the downside, which we should see playing out as we approach the pivot—and beyond the pivot, intraday RV making higher highs.When spot approaches and reaches the downside target, realized volatility should remain high, while put skew should be sold in order to see a rebound. The reason is the implication of relatively high volatility with declining intraday realized vol of vol, which indicates illiquidity at these levels. If realized volatility starts to go lower with heightened vol of vol, that would be a sign of sudden liquidity there, signaling that traders are selling strangles and straddles down there, expecting stabilization.Also, because spot is stabilizing below the centroid, customers would start to close their upside long call ratio spread, which is net negative delta for dealers, making them longer delta—meaning they have to sell delta as they unwind their hedges.However, the key is that SPX/RV beta should remain negative during long speed. If beta starts to shift longer, that would be a bullish sign only if call skew starts to catch a bid on a fixed-strike basis. But again, that would be against the structure, because the market got overly bullish on something and a gamma squeeze is incoming.

To the upside, customers are also net long upside realized volatility, but at a calmer pace. Above the upside pivot we should expect an increase in realized volatility, but much lower than to the downside—making lower highs. But to see reversion back toward the center of the fly pattern, we must see this RV move up while call skew moves down; otherwise it will start to stabilize up there if intraday realized vol of vol is elevated during the intraday RV dump.Also, because spot is stabilizing above the centroid, where dealers are net long delta, customers will start to close their downside long ratio put spreads, which generates a delta buyback flow. This usually happens near the power hour.

As the net speed profile is positive, this means that customers are betting on more liquidity to the upside than to the downside on a net basis. As a result, once spot builds a structure above the centroid, we can expect more upside momentum rather than downside. If the net profile were negative speed, by contrast, upside momentum would be less sustainable, with a much greater chance of reversing back toward the center of the fly, while the more stable move would favor the downside.This is like the skewness of a distribution.

The key is to keep in mind that in a short-speed environment the spot/RV beta naturally leans positive, while in a long-speed environment the spot/RV beta naturally leans negative. Also keep in mind that volatility is an inverse measure of liquidity, and know what the fly patterns are betting on. A customer long fly trade is a bet on momentum, while a short fly trade expects ranging. Additionally, the net speed profile tells us where the market expects more liquidity and stability.

The aim of this development is to provide a fast, reality-derived method for reading intraday trends that reveals hidden patterns and the underlying sentiment through spot movements, without any expensive or complicated techniques. Therefore, one must understand the relationship between the speed profile and realized volatility, and examine the tendencies during the intraday session in that light. The key remains to abandon speculation and random guessing and instead rely on deliberate, patient observation and wait for the right opportunity—just like a sniper…

4. Zero Vanna Lines (“vanna flips”) and Zero Speed Lines (“speed flips”)Again, they are identical in effect. Both are very strong support and resistance levels; vanna flips may be the strongest—almost “unbreakable.”

Vanna is highly conditional, because implied volatility changes differently across tenors. It cannot be simply aggregated the way furu services do. Dealers measure vega in maturity buckets and hedge it using covariance/correlation among buckets; they don’t sum vega. It’s like a vector across maturities.So the hedging impact also differs. But for the base case, look at the vanna curve—the change in vega with respect to spot:

You can see that vanna is zero around the ATM strike, where the vega function peaks (as with any derivative function). When volatility increases, the zero point slides toward the OTM calls:

This means that if we have a dealer long put spread pattern to the downside and a zero-vanna point where vanna flips from positive to negative as price moves down (positive zomma), the hedging flow will literally reverse beyond the flip.

Long vanna means a positive relationship between delta and IV, while short vanna means a negative relationship between delta and IV.So when spot is falling toward the zero-vanna line and IV is increasing, dealers have more and more delta to hedge by selling futures (long vanna). At the same time, the zero-vanna line starts to move upward; at some point spot reaches this line and goes beyond it. However, here the increased volatility suddenly reduces dealers’ long-delta exposure (short vanna), and dealers must start to buy back futures.This is why a zero-vanna line with long zomma cannot be broken by increased IV.The opposite happens at zero-vanna lines with negative zomma, where vanna flips from positive to negative while spot is moving up (or flips from negative to positive while spot is moving down). Here, as spot moves up toward the flip, IV is crushed (long vanna), and the zero-vanna line moves toward spot. Once spot crosses the flip, the low IV suddenly supplies dealers with positive delta (short vanna) that they must hedge by selling futures. (The same holds in reverse when we are in a short vanna regime moving towards a long vanna regime; in this case, the flip moves away from spot.Quick mind game: vol up / delta down ⇒ spot up (vanna squeeze) — reaching the flip with positive zomma, switching into a long vanna regime; vol up suddenly increases delta — dealers sell.Vol down / delta up ⇒ spot down spiral — reaching the flip with negative zomma, switching into a long vanna regime; vol down suddenly dumps dealers’ delta exposure — dealers buy.)

Long vanna means a positive relationship between delta and IV, while short vanna means a negative relationship between delta and IV.So when spot is falling toward the zero-vanna line and IV is increasing, dealers have more and more delta to hedge by selling futures (long vanna). At the same time, the zero-vanna line starts to move upward; at some point spot reaches this line and goes beyond it. However, here the increased volatility suddenly reduces dealers’ long-delta exposure (short vanna), and dealers must start to buy back futures.This is why a zero-vanna line with long zomma cannot be broken by increased IV.The opposite happens at zero-vanna lines with negative zomma, where vanna flips from positive to negative while spot is moving up (or flips from negative to positive while spot is moving down). Here, as spot moves up toward the flip, IV is crushed (long vanna), and the zero-vanna line moves toward spot. Once spot crosses the flip, the low IV suddenly supplies dealers with positive delta (short vanna) that they must hedge by selling futures.

(The same holds in reverse when we are in a short vanna regime moving towards a long vanna regime; in this case, the flip moves away from spot.Quick mind game: vol up / delta down ⇒ spot up (vanna squeeze) — reaching the flip with positive zomma, switching into a long vanna regime; vol up suddenly increases delta — dealers sell.Vol down / delta up ⇒ spot down spiral — reaching the flip with negative zomma, switching into a long vanna regime; vol down suddenly dumps dealers’ delta exposure — dealers buy.)

The effect of zero-vanna lines is amplified by zero-speed lines, which always coincide with zero-vanna areas. The converse, however, is not true. The change in the speed profile produces the same reversal in delta-hedging flow as a change in the vanna profile, except here it has a direct impact on realized volatility. Note that local zomma exposure in both cases strengthens the rejection effect via gamma.

Thus, the vanna–speed flip lines are consistent with our intuition: spot movements will reflexively do what customers have priced in, leveraged through dealer flow, as long as the dynamics are mathematically consistent with what is expected within the given structure. Deviations from this point to a change in sentiment.

Naturally, this model does not withstand every volatility expansion. Because of the vega-of-vanna and vega-of-speed functions, the pivot effect can, on average, tolerate at most roughly a 15–20% increase in volatility; beyond that, the Greeks have no effect on prices. That’s why circuit breakers and the like exist.Of course, this value is highly dependent on positioning and convexity, but the point is that a medium volatility expansion can still be absorbed, whereas a very high vol squeeze cannot be fended off. (See, e.g., the 2024 December crash or the 2025 April crash.) In such cases, measures like aggregated profit-taking, circuit breakers, LULD, auction price collars, future price limits, trading suspensions, risk controls, etc., can intervene.

Have fun with studying…

Share Stochastic Volatility - Options market insights

Share
